# Deep Multiple Drug Classification

## Requirements

To run the script correctly, Python 3.10.12 is required. Additionally, an NVIDIA GPU is recommended, as it can significantly accelerate training.

### Setup

The environment can be set up using either Python or Conda. In both cases, it is crucial to activate the environment before running any commands.

#### Python

To set up the environment and install all the required dependencies, run the following command:

```bash
make setup
```

Next, activate the environment:

```bash
source ./.venv/bin/activate
```

#### Conda

First, install Miniconda in your environment by following the [documentation](https://www.anaconda.com/docs/getting-started/miniconda/install). Once the installation is complete, create a new environment with Python 3.10.12 and activate it.

```bash
conda create -n deepmdc python=3.10.12
conda activate deepmdc
```

Finally, install the Python libraries:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Hydra Settings

Hydra configurations make it easy to manage training and testing parameters. Below is a description of the main configuration files and their parameters.

* **config.yaml**:
Main configuration file, includes references to other config files and global parameters.

  * **device**: Specifies the device to run the model on. Default: `"cuda:0"`.
  * **rnd_seed**: Sets the random seed for reproducibility. Default: `0`.
  * **create_orfs**: Creates TSV files from the JSONs present in the `jsons` directory (The user must create the `jsons` folder). Default: `False`.
  * **request_for_permition_to_create_hdf5**: Asks for permission to create an HDF5 file from TSV files. Default: `False`.
  * **results_directory**: The directory where training results will be saved. Default: `"results"`.
  * **max_seq_len**: Maximum length of input sequences. Default: `5000`.
  * **biological_json_file**: The compressed JSON file generated by Bakta with biological information. Default: `all_ORFs.json.xz`.
  * **database**: Contains paths to input files:
    * **base_dir**: The base directory where the database and test folders are located.
    * **metadata_file**: A TSV file with sample IDs and resistance profiles. Default: `"database/metadata.tsv"`.
    * **genomesdata_path**: The directory containing ORF files. Default: `"database/orfs"`.

* **data_splitting.yaml**:
Configuration for data splitting.

  * **stratify**: If true, performs stratified splitting to balance classes. Default: `True`.
  * **metadata_file_id_column**: Column name in metadata containing sample IDs. Default: `ID`.
  * **sequence_column**: Column name containing ORF sequences in input files. Default: `orf`.
  * **sequence_counts_column**: Column indicating how many times each ORF appears. Default: `templates`.
  * **sample_n_sequences**: Number of sequences to sample per genome during training. Use 0 to load all sequences. Default: `10000`.
  * **split_column_name**: The column to use for data splitting. The script will maintain the same proportion of this column's values in each fold. Default: `Real_MEM`.

* **model.yaml**:
Model architecture configuration.

  * **sequence_embedding**:
    * **type**: Embedding layer type, e.g., CNN or LSTM. Default: `CNN`.
    * **n_layers**: Number of layers in sequence embedding. Default: `1`.
    * **kernel_size**: CNN kernel size (number of amino acids per filter). Default: `9`.
    * **n_units**: Number of neurons in embedding layer (number of kernels or LSTM blocks). Default: `32`.

  * **attention**:
    * **n_layers**: Number of layers in the attention network.  Default: `2`.
    * **n_units**: Number of neurons in the attention network. Default: `32`.

  * **output**:
    * **n_layers**: Number of layers in output network. Default: `1`.
    * **n_units**: Number of neurons in output network. Default: `32`.

* **task.yaml**:
Task configuration.

  * **target**: Defines classification tasks:

    * **type**: Task type. Default: `binary`.
    * **column_name**: Metadata column with task labels. Default: `MEM`.
    * **positive_class**: For binary tasks, defines the positive class. Default: `R`.
    * **pos_weight**: Weight applied to the positive class to handle imbalance. Default: `1`.
    * **task_weight**: Weight of this task in the total loss function (if multiple tasks). Default: `1`.

* **training.yaml**:
Training configuration.

  * **n_updates**: Number of update steps during training. Default: `10000`.
  * **evaluate_at**: Frequency (in steps) to evaluate the model on validation and training sets. Default: `100`.
  * **learning_rate**: Learning rate for the Adam optimizer. Default: `0.0001`.
  * **batch_size**: Number of genomes per minibatch during training. Default: `4`.
  * **n_worker_processes**: Number of background processes to use for converting dataset to HDF5 container and trainingset dataloader. Default: `4`.

* **test.yaml**:
Model evaluation configuration.

  * **model_path**: Path to the trained model to be evaluated. Default: `"results"`.
  * **metadata_file**: Path to test metadata file. Default: `test/metadata.tsv`.
  * **orfs_path**: Path to ORF files for the test set. Default: `test/orfs`.

* **analysis.yaml**:
Configuration for data analysis.

  * **input_table**: Path to the TSV file to be analyzed. Default: `general_model.tsv`.
  * **analysis_output_path**: Folder to save the CSV and PNG files from analysis. Default: `analysis_output`.

## Input Format

Two files are required for both training and testing the models.

**metadata.tsv:** This file contains the filenames and their classification under a specific label.

| ID          | MEM |
| ----------- | --- |
| sample1.tsv | R   |
| sample2.tsv | S   |

**sample1.tsv:** Each of these files represents the genomic repertoire of a different bacterial sample. These files contain a column with the ORF sequence and a second column indicating how many times it appears in the genome.

| orf                              | templates |
| -------------------------------- | --------- |
| MKKTRYTEEQIAFALKQAE              | 1         |
| MTGICVGEVCRKMGISEAIFIIRREIRCSGRN | 2         |

## Datasets Download

The datasets used to train the models described in the article can be found in this [repository](https://github.com/CABGenOrg/deepmdc_mem_data).
Before running the training or testing, you need to:

1. Download the datasets files.
2. Unzip the contents.
3. Place them in the **root folder** of the project.

## Usage

### Training

To start training with the default parameters, simply run:

```bash
make run
```

You can also customize the training configuration by passing parameters directly. For example:

* **Adjust the learning rate and the number of sequence embedding units:**

```bash
python3 cabgen_hopfield_main.py training.learning_rate=0.001 model.sequence_embedding.n_units=64
```

* **Combine multiple parameters to train several models at once**:

```bash
python3 cabgen_hopfield_main.py -m model.sequence_embedding.kernel_size=30,45 training.learning_rate=0.00005 training.n_updates=10000 training.evaluate_at=100,200,500 data_splitting.sample_n_sequences=0 +hydra.job.logging=debug hydra.verbose=true hydra/launcher=basic
```

* **Skipping HDF5 container creation**

During the execution of any script that accesses a database (cabgen_hopfield_main.py, fold_cross_validation.py, model_prediction.py, test_model.py), an HDF5 container is created by default, from which the training, testing, and validation dataloaders are built.

If the file already exists, this step can be skipped by updating the genomesdata_path configuration for the script in question to point to the existing container (simply append .hdf5 to the default configuration).

Example for running `cabgen_hopfield_main.py`:

```bash
python3 cabgen_hopfield_main.py database.genomesdata_path="database/orfs.hdf5"
```

### Testing

The script `test_model.py` evaluates a trained model on new data.
By default, it uses the settings defined in `config/test.yaml` and evaluates the most recent model stored in `/results`.
To test a different model, adjust the parameter `test.model_path`.

* **Evaluate the most recent model in** `/results`:

```bash
python3 test_model.py
```

* **Evaluate a specific model (e.g., with kernel size 48):**

```bash
python3 test_model.py test.model_path="results/model_2050125/checkpoint/model.zip" model.kernel_size=48
```

* **Change the test metadata file:**

```bash
python3 test_model.py test.metadata_file="new_metadata.tsv"
```

### Test Set Prediction

The script `model_prediction.py`, by default, generates a table containing the prediction values of the most recent model stored in the `results/` folder, using the test data.

If you wish to use a specific model, set the file path in the `test.model_path` parameter. In addition, other parameters can be adjusted as needed — simply check which ones are used by the script and override them directly in the command line.

* Run prediction using the most recent model:

```bash
python3 model_prediction.py
```

* Run prediction using a specific model and set kernel_size to 48:

```bash
python3 model_prediction.py test.model_path="results/model_2050125/checkpoint/model.zip" model.sequence_embedding.kernel_size=48 
```

### 5 Fold Cross Validation

The script `fold_cross_validation.py` performs 5-fold cross-validation to assess the stability of model metrics.
It splits the dataset into 5 subsets and trains 5 models, each time varying the validation/test subset.
You can also override any parameter directly from the command line, depending on the script’s available options.

* **Run cross-validation with the default settings:**

```bash
python3 fold_cross_validation.py
```

* **Run cross-validation with a kernel size of 48 and 10,000 updates:**

```bash
python3 fold_cross_validation.py model.sequence_embedding.kernel_size=48 training.n_updates=10000
```

### Attention Coefficients

The scripts `extract_attention_weights.py` and `prediction_and_att_weights.py` extract the attention coefficients associated with each ORF in every sample. The former extracts all coefficients, resulting in very large tables, while the latter collects only the top 5 coefficients for each sample. It also displays the model’s prediction for the corresponding sample and whether the prediction is correct or not. The execution of either script follows the same parameters as the test script. If a JSON file containing biological information (generated by the Bakta tool) is available, its contents will be added to the table. The default JSON filename is `all_ORFs.json.xz`, which contains all ORFs in our data.

* Run extraction using the most recent model:

```bash
python3 prediction_and_att_weights.py
```

* Run extraction using a specific model, set `kernel_size` to 48 and other `biologic_json_file`:

```bash
python3 prediction_and_att_weights.py test.model_path="results/model_2050125/checkpoint/model.zip" model.sequence_embedding.kernel_size=48 biologic_json_file="my_ORFs.json.xz"
```

### Data Analysis

The script `data_analysis.py` is responsible for generating tables and plots to explore the output TSV file produced by `prediction_and_att_weights.py`.

You only need a TSV file in the correct [format](https://github.com/CABGenOrg/deepmdc_mem_data/blob/main/data/tables/general_model.tsv).

* Run the default analysis:

```bash
python3 data_analysis.py
```

* Run the analysis with a custom table:

```bash
python3 data_analysis.py analysis.input_table="my_table.tsv"
```

## Model Overview

1. **Data splitting:**

The function `make_dataloaders_stratified` splits the dataset into training, validation, and test sets.
When the `stratify` option is enabled, it ensures balanced class distributions across splits.
For example, if the class proportion is 50/50, each split will preserve that ratio (or as close as possible).

2. **Model architecture:**

The **DeepMDC** model integrates three main components:

* **Sequence Embedding:** Captures patterns in ORF sequences (using CNN or LSTM).
* **Attention Network:** A modern Hopfield network that highlights the most relevant ORF regions.
* **Output Network:** Classifies the samples into the target classes.

3. **Training:**

During training, the model adjusts its weights to minimize the loss function.

4. **Evaluation:**

The model is evaluated using the following metrics:

* **ROC AUC**
* **Balanced Accuracy (BACC)**
* **F1-score**
* **Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC)**
* **Loss**
